README.md, before:

# BlenderJPS - JuPedSim Trajectory Importer for Blender

A Blender addon for importing JuPedSim simulation SQLite files, visualizing agent trajectories and simulation geometry.

![Addon Preview](images/preview_v2.jpg)

## Features

- **Import JuPedSim SQLite files**: Load trajectory data and walkable area geometry
- **Animated Agents**: Each agent is represented as an animated sphere following their trajectory
- **Agent Path Visualization**: Each agent's complete path is automatically created as a curve object
- **Path Visibility Toggle**: Show/hide all agent path curves with a single checkbox
- **Geometry Visualization**: Walkable area boundaries and obstacles are displayed as curves
- **Big Data Mode**: Stream agents as particles for very large datasets
- **Display Controls**: Adjust agent scale, geometry thickness, and frame rate
- **Easy Installation**: Built-in dependency installer for required Python packages

## Requirements

- **Blender 4.0+** (tested with Blender 4.0 and later)
- **Python packages**: `pedpy`, `numpy<2.0` (installed automatically via addon)

> **Note:** While `pedpy` is currently only used to open sqlite files, something that pandas can also do natively, we include it for maintainability and to prepare for future features that will leverage its visualization and processing capabilities.

## Installation

1. **Download the latest release** from [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/FabianPlum/BlenderJPS/releases)
2. **Open Blender in Administrator mode** (required for dependency installation)
   - **Windows**: Right-click Blender → "Run as administrator"
   - **macOS**: `sudo /Applications/Blender.app/Contents/MacOS/Blender`
   - **Linux**: `sudo blender`
3. Go to **Edit → Preferences → Add-ons**
4. Click **Install...** and select the downloaded ZIP file
5. Enable the addon by checking the box next to "BlenderJPS - JuPedSim Importer"
6. Expand the addon settings and click **Install Dependencies** (this installs `pedpy` and `numpy<2.0`)
7. **Restart Blender** (normal mode, no admin needed)

The **JuPedSim** panel will appear in the right sidebar of the 3D Viewport (press `N` if the sidebar is hidden).

## Usage

1. Open Blender and go to the **3D Viewport**
2. Open the sidebar (press `N` if hidden)
3. Find the **JuPedSim** tab
4. Click **Browse...** to select your SQLite trajectory file
5. (Optional) Adjust **Load Every Nth Frame** to downsample temporal resolution for faster loading
   - `1` = Load all frames (default)
   - `2` = Load every 2nd frame (50% of keyframes)
   - `10` = Load every 10th frame (10% of keyframes) etc.
6. (Optional) Enable **Big Data Mode** to handle very large datasets (agents load as particles)
7. (Optional) Enable **Load Full Paths** if you want per-agent path curves
8. Click **Load Simulation**

### What Gets Created

- **JuPedSim_Agents** collection: Contains animated empty objects (sphere display) for each agent
  - Agents automatically hide after reaching their destination
  - Path curves for each agent showing their complete trajectory (hidden by default)
- **Big Data Mode**: Creates a single particle system driven by streamed frame updates
- **JuPedSim_Geometry** collection: Contains curve objects for boundaries and obstacles
- Animation timeline is automatically set to match the simulation frames

### Display Options

After loading a simulation, a **Display Options** section appears in the panel:

- **Agent Scale (m)**: Adjust size of agent spheres/instances
- **Geometry Thickness (m)**: Adjust thickness of walkable area curves
- **Frame Rate**: Quick access to Blender frame rate presets
- **Show Agent Paths**: Toggle checkbox to show/hide all agent path curves
  - Requires **Load Full Paths** on import
  - Paths are hidden by default but can be toggled on/off at any time
  - Each path is a 3D curve object showing the agent's complete trajectory

## Simulation Data Structure

The addon uses [PedPy](https://github.com/PedestrianDynamics/PedPy) to read JuPedSim SQLite files containing:

- **Trajectory data**: Agent positions over time (x, y coordinates per frame)
- **Walkable area**: The geometry defining where agents can move

## Troubleshooting

### "Dependencies not installed" error
- Make sure you ran Blender as Administrator when installing dependencies
- Check the Blender console (Window → Toggle System Console on Windows) for error messages
- Try reinstalling dependencies from the addon preferences

### "File not found" error
- Use absolute paths or ensure the file path is correct
- Check that the SQLite file is a valid JuPedSim trajectory file

### Agents appear at wrong scale
- JuPedSim uses meters as units. Make sure your Blender scene is set to metric units
- Agents are created as 1-meter diameter empty objects (sphere display) by default

### Loading takes too long
- Use the **Load Every Nth Frame** option to downsample the temporal resolution
- Enable **Big Data Mode** for very large datasets
- Disable **Load Full Paths** unless you really need per-agent curves
- For very large simulations, try values like 5 or 10 to significantly reduce loading time
- Linear interpolation will fill in the gaps between keyframes for smooth animation

## Development

For developers who want to work with the git repository and have changes reflected immediately in Blender:

### Development Installation (Symbolic Link)

Create a symbolic link to your `blender_jps` folder in your Blender addons directory. This allows for easier development as changes are reflected immediately.

**Windows:**
1. Open Command Prompt or PowerShell as Administrator
2. Navigate to your Blender addons directory:
   ```cmd
   cd "%APPDATA%\Blender Foundation\Blender\<version>\scripts\addons"
   ```
   Replace `<version>` with your Blender version (e.g., `4.2`)
3. Create a symbolic link:
   ```cmd
   mklink /D blender_jps "C:\path\to\BlenderJPS\blender_jps"
   ```
   Replace `C:\path\to\BlenderJPS\blender_jps` with the actual path to your `blender_jps` folder

**macOS/Linux:**
1. Open Terminal
2. Navigate to your Blender addons directory:
   ```bash
   cd ~/Library/Application\ Support/Blender/<version>/scripts/addons  # macOS
   # or
   cd ~/.config/blender/<version>/scripts/addons  # Linux
   ```
3. Create a symbolic link:
   ```bash
   ln -s /path/to/BlenderJPS/blender_jps blender_jps
   ```

4. Open Blender
5. Go to **Edit → Preferences → Add-ons**
6. Search for "JuPedSim" and enable the addon

## License

MIT License

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit issues or pull requests.

## Acknowledgments

- [JuPedSim](https://github.com/PedestrianDynamics/jupedsim) - The pedestrian dynamics simulator
- [PedPy](https://github.com/PedestrianDynamics/PedPy) - Python library for pedestrian dynamics analysis

Commit message:

Update reference to pedpy dependency

README.md, after:

# BlenderJPS - JuPedSim Trajectory Importer for Blender

A Blender addon for importing JuPedSim simulation SQLite files, visualizing agent trajectories and simulation geometry.

![Addon Preview](images/preview_v2.jpg)

## Features

- **Import JuPedSim SQLite files**: Load trajectory data and walkable area geometry
- **Animated Agents**: Each agent is represented as an animated sphere following their trajectory
- **Agent Path Visualization**: Each agent's complete path is automatically created as a curve object
- **Path Visibility Toggle**: Show/hide all agent path curves with a single checkbox
- **Geometry Visualization**: Walkable area boundaries and obstacles are displayed as curves
- **Big Data Mode**: Stream agents as particles for very large datasets
- **Display Controls**: Adjust agent scale, geometry thickness, and frame rate
- **Easy Installation**: Built-in dependency installer for required Python packages

## Requirements

- **Blender 4.0+** (tested with Blender 4.0 and later)
- **Python packages**: `pedpy`, `numpy<2.0` (installed automatically via addon)

> **Note:** `pedpy` is kept mainly for legacy compatibility and because we currently rely on its `shapely` dependency for geometry processing. SQLite reading is now handled via a streaming approach inspired by the [JuPedSim visualizer's reader](https://github.com/PedestrianDynamics/jupedsim/tree/master/python_modules/jupedsim_visualizer/jupedsim_visualizer).

## Installation

1. **Download the latest release** from [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/FabianPlum/BlenderJPS/releases)
2. **Open Blender in Administrator mode** (required for dependency installation)
   - **Windows**: Right-click Blender → "Run as administrator"
   - **macOS**: `sudo /Applications/Blender.app/Contents/MacOS/Blender`
   - **Linux**: `sudo blender`
3. Go to **Edit → Preferences → Add-ons**
4. Click **Install...** and select the downloaded ZIP file
5. Enable the addon by checking the box next to "BlenderJPS - JuPedSim Importer"
6. Expand the addon settings and click **Install Dependencies** (this installs `pedpy` and `numpy<2.0`)
7. **Restart Blender** (normal mode, no admin needed)

The **JuPedSim** panel will appear in the right sidebar of the 3D Viewport (press `N` if the sidebar is hidden).

## Usage

1. Open Blender and go to the **3D Viewport**
2. Open the sidebar (press `N` if hidden)
3. Find the **JuPedSim** tab
4. Click **Browse...** to select your SQLite trajectory file
5. (Optional) Adjust **Load Every Nth Frame** to downsample temporal resolution for faster loading
   - `1` = Load all frames (default)
   - `2` = Load every 2nd frame (50% of keyframes)
   - `10` = Load every 10th frame (10% of keyframes) etc.
6. (Optional) Enable **Big Data Mode** to handle very large datasets (agents load as particles)
7. (Optional) Enable **Load Full Paths** if you want per-agent path curves
8. Click **Load Simulation**

### What Gets Created

- **JuPedSim_Agents** collection: Contains animated empty objects (sphere display) for each agent
  - Agents automatically hide after reaching their destination
  - Path curves for each agent showing their complete trajectory (hidden by default)
- **Big Data Mode**: Creates a single particle system driven by streamed frame updates
- **JuPedSim_Geometry** collection: Contains curve objects for boundaries and obstacles
- Animation timeline is automatically set to match the simulation frames

### Display Options

After loading a simulation, a **Display Options** section appears in the panel:

- **Agent Scale (m)**: Adjust size of agent spheres/instances
- **Geometry Thickness (m)**: Adjust thickness of walkable area curves
- **Frame Rate**: Quick access to Blender frame rate presets
- **Show Agent Paths**: Toggle checkbox to show/hide all agent path curves
  - Requires **Load Full Paths** on import
  - Paths are hidden by default but can be toggled on/off at any time
  - Each path is a 3D curve object showing the agent's complete trajectory

## Simulation Data Structure

The addon uses [PedPy](https://github.com/PedestrianDynamics/PedPy) (mainly for `shapely`) and streams the SQLite data similarly to the JuPedSim visualizer to read:

- **Trajectory data**: Agent positions over time (x, y coordinates per frame)
- **Walkable area**: The geometry defining where agents can move

## Troubleshooting

### "Dependencies not installed" error
- Make sure you ran Blender as Administrator when installing dependencies
- Check the Blender console (Window → Toggle System Console on Windows) for error messages
- Try reinstalling dependencies from the addon preferences

### "File not found" error
- Use absolute paths or ensure the file path is correct
- Check that the SQLite file is a valid JuPedSim trajectory file

### Agents appear at wrong scale
- JuPedSim uses meters as units. Make sure your Blender scene is set to metric units
- Agents are created as 1-meter diameter empty objects (sphere display) by default

### Loading takes too long
- Use the **Load Every Nth Frame** option to downsample the temporal resolution
- Enable **Big Data Mode** for very large datasets
- Disable **Load Full Paths** unless you really need per-agent curves
- For very large simulations, try values like 5 or 10 to significantly reduce loading time
- Linear interpolation will fill in the gaps between keyframes for smooth animation

## Development

For developers who want to work with the git repository and have changes reflected immediately in Blender:

### Development Installation (Symbolic Link)

Create a symbolic link to your `blender_jps` folder in your Blender addons directory. This allows for easier development as changes are reflected immediately.

**Windows:**
1. Open Command Prompt or PowerShell as Administrator
2. Navigate to your Blender addons directory:
   ```cmd
   cd "%APPDATA%\Blender Foundation\Blender\<version>\scripts\addons"
   ```
   Replace `<version>` with your Blender version (e.g., `4.2`)
3. Create a symbolic link:
   ```cmd
   mklink /D blender_jps "C:\path\to\BlenderJPS\blender_jps"
   ```
   Replace `C:\path\to\BlenderJPS\blender_jps` with the actual path to your `blender_jps` folder

**macOS/Linux:**
1. Open Terminal
2. Navigate to your Blender addons directory:
   ```bash
   cd ~/Library/Application\ Support/Blender/<version>/scripts/addons  # macOS
   # or
   cd ~/.config/blender/<version>/scripts/addons  # Linux
   ```
3. Create a symbolic link:
   ```bash
   ln -s /path/to/BlenderJPS/blender_jps blender_jps
   ```

4. Open Blender
5. Go to **Edit → Preferences → Add-ons**
6. Search for "JuPedSim" and enable the addon

## License

MIT License

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit issues or pull requests.

## Acknowledgments

- [JuPedSim](https://github.com/PedestrianDynamics/jupedsim) - The pedestrian dynamics simulator
- [PedPy](https://github.com/PedestrianDynamics/PedPy) - Python library for pedestrian dynamics analysis
